Prepress processes

The process of producing printed products can be divided into three parts: prepress, printing (press), and print finishing (postpress). Printed products are graphic products in the widest sense: books and brochures, newspapers and magazines,
leaflets and posters, labels and stickers, stamps and securities, credit and check cards, as well as folding cartons and blister packs, bags and pouches, beakers and tins, paper plates and lanterns, paper tissues, beer mats, mailings, and much more. Prepress includes all the processing steps required to go from the preparation of the text, original images and
graphics as well as the design concept right up to the production of the ready-for-print master; the master (printing plate) is then employed at the printing stage to produce the job  The informational content and professional typographic/ graphic design of printed products are also a useful starting point for publications in the field of electronic media even outside print media, such as homepages on the Internet or CD-ROMs containing text and pictures. In a wider sense, therefore ,“prepress” is also referred to as “pre-media”, meaning the preparation of text and image for the several  publication media. The premedia production stage may already be incorporated in the actual prepress stage. A  fundamental technological change has taken place within prepress. The use of conventional typesetting machines and film has been replaced by computer technology in virtually all branches of this industry. Text and image are digitized or actually created digitally, processed electronically and output directly onto the printing plate in print format, and increasingly without the use of film intermediates. Nevertheless, for many companies film remains an indispensable information carrier, albeit for a short-term transitional phase. It is for this reason that both prepress
technologies, 
• conventional and
• digital
are discussed. The distinguishing factor between them is the way the films are used: all technological variations
where individual films are used for the page or print sheet composition and require conventional, mechanical/
manual film assembly processes,  and do not therefore employ digital full-page film exposure systems, are dealt with under the category “conventional prepress.” The section “digital prepress” outlines the processes of digital image  processing, computer to plate, computer to film, and so on Gutenberg’s invention of movable metallic type (1440), their production and the letterset printing press not only revolutionized the education system by enabling mass production of printed products, it provided at the same time the impetus for a series of diverse solutions to the general problem of converting text, images and layout as efficiently as possible into a printing master in order to be able to produce quality
printed products more and more economically and up to the minute – which has continued up to the present
day.
Machines that mechanized and automated the typesetting process with letterpress type – such as “monotype” and “linotype” – are just as much milestones in this chain of development as is the invention of lithography by Senefelder in around 1800, which released an impressive amount of development potential and led to modern high performance offset
printing. The worldwide dominant position of offset printing compared to other printing processes was made possible to a considerable extent by the efficient production of offset plates and the outstanding print quality achievable on a wide variety of substrates. The first step in producing a printing plate is the creation of the masters/film copies for the printing
plates. Film copies contain all of the information to be printed on the printed sheet corresponding to each color, but also opaque black-and-white originals especially for single-color work. In contrast to the digital production of masters where text and image processing are carried out at the same time, in conventional prepress text creation and image processing are carried out separately. Photomechanical processes are used in image processing, predominantly for line art images (graphics), but still also for continuous-tone images, an area which is increasingly being replaced by digital processes.
Typesetting is carried out without exception on (desktop publishing) computers (e.g., Apple Macintosh, IBM compatible PCs) in combination with powerful software and automated imaging systems to produce the text film masters. Text and image are combined in assembly processes (cutting, positioning, pasting, etc.) to produce the film copy. 

Word Processing, Typesetting

Typesetting processes in manual or machine type or phototypesetting are described in detail in the literature . These now rarely used processes will not be discussed here. Today’s typesetting begins with the inputting of text into a computer. Word processing on computers with powerful, user friendly word processing programs has become state of the art.

Typesetting Procedure

The starting point for typesetting is the manuscript created by the author . Clearity and correctness are more important in the manuscript than the question of style and aesthetics. Necessary corrections should ideally be made as soon as they are recognized. In the interest of clarity, corrections should be made according to the rules of correction for instance, as described in DIN 16 511 or ISO 5776. Text input is the first stage of typesetting .  This task is increasingly being undertaken by the author himself. Since there is a wide variety of hardware and software products for the PC there may be a compatibility problem when the printing house comes to process text files. Interface compatibility is therefore vital. Printing houses have to employ a large number of programs (“import filters”) to convert documents supplied to them and to be able to input them into the word processing systems they have. Text input is followed by word processing, which creates the design parameters planned in the layout such as the choice of font, font size, line length and spaces for
images to be added later. The layout data are set by the author and publisher or agreed upon between the author, publisher, and printing house. Word processing is followed by text output. The designed blocks of text are output onto
film or paper. In this form they are ready for manual page make-up, that is, for completion with images and graphics required by the page of the book. If page layout including the integration of text and image is carried out electronically in the computer, the completed page is output on film or paper. The file forms a useful starting point either for electronic/digital processing , such as computer to plate or computer to film, for digital printing by direct imaging, and so on, or for further use in electronic media. Corrections to the output text are time-consuming and expensive and should therefore be avoided as much as possible. For this reason a number of correction stages are incorporated into the procedure. “House corrections” are made in the printing house with the help of paper printouts of the digitally stored
text. Corrections by the author follow the completion of the designed columns of text. These are output as galley proofs on paper and sent to the author for proofreading. When corrections have been made the page is made up. The main function of the correction process which forms page make-up is the placing of the pictures in the correct position on the page, the correct and complete assigning of the picture captions, footnotes, cross references to other pages, and the arranging of headers and footers including page numbering. Since corrections from this point on can be very expensive,
it is important to ensure that the previous correction stages are carried out with utmost care and attention so that work can be guaranteed to be as free of errors as possible. After further proofreading and checking the author signs to confirm that the pages are correct and ready for printing, that is, he passes them for press.

Manuscript

A manuscript in the classical sense is the devised handwritten text that is to appear in print. The clearer and more error-free the written manuscript is, the faster and more error-free the subsequent input via the keyboard. The author should give the printing house the manuscript in its final form; it should not undergo any fundamental changes at a later stage.
Easy text creation and editing is made possible by the wide variety of programs available. Tables, graphs, and drawings can be created and inserted into the text. Using these aids, even non-specialists in typesetting, which is generally true of authors, can achieve a good result. As a rule the printing house is supplied with a printout of the text on paper as well as a data carrier with the relevant file of digital data. 

Text Input

The manuscript first reaches the preproofing department of the printing house (mostly a publisher or prepress/
premedia).Necessary corrections are made to the manuscript by the proof-reader (editor). The preproofing endows the manuscript with typesetting data concerning type sizes for continuous text, headings, markings, footnotes as well as instructions with regard to layout such as picture inserts, indents, and so on. After the text has been input, it is converted by the computer, character by character, into machine-readable codes. Text input is essentially done via the keyboard,
but sometimes also using OCR technology or less frequently as input speech. 
